putting a segment that cannot join the tailnet onto it, with a phone

TAILNET BRIDGES

  A bridge is a phone with two legs: WiFi to the house, USB-C Ethernet to
  something that has no way onto the tailnet of its own.

      house WiFi --wlan0-- [ phone ] --lan0-- the segment
                               |
                        tailscaled advertises 10.99.x.0/24

  Two of them, for two problems that look nothing alike until you write them
  down:

    tailnet-bridge-moose-bmc   moose's BMC has a dedicated management port and
      (Librem 5)               nothing else. Behind this bridge, moose is
                               reachable while it is powered off, hung, or has
                               no working OS -- and the BMC's own credentials
                               revert to factory defaults on a power loss, so
                               the tailnet policy is the only access control
                               worth relying on.

    tailnet-bridge-generic     rpi3 and rpi4 sit on a cable. The rpi3 is not
      (PinePhone)              provisioned and has no DNS entry; neither has a
                               tailnet identity of its own. Behind this bridge
                               a workspace can reach a board without anything
                               on the house network reaching either.

  `wk bridge ls` lists what is declared and what answers. Its state column has
  a word for the case that used to hide: a phone that answers with a host key
  that is not the one on record reads `key-changed`, not `unreachable`. A
  reflash changes the key, so that is the *normal* state of a freshly installed
  bridge -- and reporting it as absence sent the diagnosis at the phone's radio
  instead of at known_hosts (seen 2026-08-22, with both bridges reading
  `unreachable` while one of them was up, provisioned and healthy). Drop the
  stale line with `ssh-keygen -R <name>`; anything that is not a reflash is
  worth reading first.

THE TWO LANES

  A bridge runs postmarketOS, which is what makes one role and one builder
  cover both phones: pmOS carries `pine64-pinephone` and `purism-librem5` in the
  same tree, with the same OpenRC, the same apk and the same NetworkManager. The
  hand-built Librem 5 this replaces ran PureOS and was written in systemd,
  Debian's NetworkManager and apt -- none of which was portable to a second
  phone.

  One command does the whole path:

      wk bridge provision tailnet-bridge-generic

  It builds what it needs, writes a card, and then stops -- because the next
  step is a hand. It tells you exactly what to do with the card, the cable, the
  wall charger, the kill switch and the dock; waits; picks the story back up on
  the other side; applies the role; and stops once more for the one thing it
  cannot do, the tailnet policy. Then it checks the route actually came live,
  which is a different claim from "I pasted it" and the only one that matters.

  WHERE IT INSTALLS: the phone's internal storage, and there is no second
  option. A bridge writes leases, logs and tailscale state for months, and a
  microSD is the part of a phone most likely to wear out or work loose -- so the
  card is the rescue copy, never the system. Writing the bridge image to the card
  and letting the phone boot that is quicker to reach and used to be offered
  here; it is gone, because it left the bridge living on the one component most
  likely to fail. GETTING IT ONTO INTERNAL STORAGE below has the mechanism.

  A phone Jumpdrive does not cover is refused by name rather than quietly
  falling back to the card. Today that means the Librem 5, and the refusal names
  what would fix it: a fetch profile with a pinned URL, its sha256, and
  FET_DEVICE set to that phone's pmOS codename.

  That route is the reason the phone needs a cable: it is plugged into the
  machine holding the card reader, Jumpdrive exports its internal storage as USB
  mass storage, and that storage is then an ordinary removable disk on an
  ordinary machine. Both halves are rpi5 here, and BR_CARD names it once.

  How that disk is identified is worth knowing, because every obvious way is
  wrong. Jumpdrive exports the SD card *as well as* the eMMC, as two separate
  LUNs -- so "the disk that appeared" is normally two, and one of them is the
  Jumpdrive currently running. Writing to that one destroys the tool being used
  to do the writing and leaves the eMMC untouched. And the three things that
  look like discriminators are not: LUN order works until a release reorders it,
  both LUNs are the same gadget so they carry identical model strings, and the
  sizes overlap (16/32/128 GB of eMMC against whatever card you own).

  What is not a guess: we wrote the Jumpdrive card ourselves, minutes earlier,
  and verified the read-back. So provision hashes the first mebibyte of each
  exported disk and compares it with the image it just wrote -- the card is the
  one that matches, and the eMMC is what is left, with nothing recognised and no
  ordering assumed. It is fully automatic and there is no prompt. The length of
  each read is checked as well as its hash, because a disk that reads zero bytes
  hashes to the sha256 of the empty string: a valid-looking digest that matches
  nothing, which unguarded would classify an unreadable disk as the eMMC and aim
  a write at it. Anything that leaves the answer undecided -- no disk matching
  the card, or two -- stops the run and prints what it saw.

  Nothing in that chain holds a tailscale credential, and that is deliberate
  rather than unfinished. Minting a tagged auth key and writing the policy both
  need an API key, and a repository that held a policy-write one would be a
  repository whose compromise rewrites every ACL you have. So provision asks and
  waits at those two points instead of acquiring the ability to do them itself.

  Every step is skipped when it is already done, so the way to use it after
  something goes wrong is to run it again. Two flags for the cases it cannot
  infer:

      --no-write    the phone already holds the right system; go straight to
                    waiting for it and applying the role
      --rebuild     build a fresh image rather than using the newest in the
                    store (--image <id> picks a specific one instead)
      --disk        write the card somewhere other than BR_CARD, for a day the
                    reader is a different machine

  The pieces are still commands, and provision is a chain of them rather than a
  replacement -- which is what makes a half-finished run recoverable by hand.
  The card route:

      wk sysimage build bridge-pinephone            # a pmOS system for the phone
      wk sysimage write <id> --disk rpi5:/dev/mmcblk0
      # ...card into the phone, power on...
      wk bridge setup tailnet-bridge-generic        # the role, over ssh

  ...and the eMMC route is the same list with Jumpdrive in front of it, which is
  spelled out under GETTING IT ONTO INTERNAL STORAGE below.

  `wk bridge setup` on its own is also the *re*-provisioning path, and the one
  to reach for after any change to a conf or to bridge/provision.sh: it is
  idempotent, it needs no card, and it reports how many things it changed.

  The image is built by pmbootstrap on a Linux aarch64 machine over ssh --
  `rpi5` by default -- because pmbootstrap is Linux-only and needs root, and the
  workstation driving this is a Mac. Both phones are aarch64, so the build host
  runs the target's own architecture and nothing is emulated; the builder
  refuses a host that is not aarch64 rather than quietly taking ten times as
  long. Minutes, with a warm package cache.

  What goes into the image, so that the phone is reachable the first time it
  boots and `wk bridge setup` has something to talk to:

    the ssh key      $WK_IMAGE_KEY, or ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub
    the WiFi         copied from the build host's own connection, on the build
                     host, so the PSK never travels through a log or an agent's
                     context. This is why the build host has to be a machine on
                     the WiFi the phone will use -- a phone has no cable, and an
                     image without a credential boots into isolation.
    the hostname     the bridge's name
    the packages     the whole bridge role's package list, so provisioning needs
                     no egress and no apk index that has moved on
    the console      user `user`, password `147147` -- the phone's own screen,
                     which is the recovery path when WiFi and ssh are both gone.
                     Password authentication over the network is off.
    mDNS             avahi, with the service enabled in the image -- one of
                     several ways in, and no longer the one everything rests on.
                     See FIRST CONTACT below: an access point that does not
                     forward multicast between its radios breaks mDNS while
                     leaving the phone perfectly reachable, which is a failure
                     worth routing around rather than re-diagnosing each time.
    root's ssh key   the same key as the console user's. pmbootstrap installs it
                     for that user only, and that user cannot become root without
                     typing a password -- so provisioning, which is
                     non-interactive over ssh, died on its first privileged
                     write. Root by key is the same authority as a passwordless
                     doas rule and says so out loud.

  The image carries the device's own bootloader: pmbootstrap embeds it at the
  offset the device declares (`deviceinfo_sd_embed_firmware`, in units of 1024
  bytes -- 8 KiB on a PinePhone, 33 KiB on a Librem 5). The builder checks it is
  there rather than writing it, because writing it by hand overlapped
  pmbootstrap's copy and turned a working image into an unbootable card.

FIRST CONTACT, AND WHY IT IS NOT JUST mDNS

  A freshly installed phone has no tailnet identity -- `tailscale up` is
  something `wk bridge setup` runs -- so the name in the conf does not resolve
  until after the first successful provision. Something else has to reach it
  that once.

  And it has to reach it *while it is awake*, which is the circular bit. Step 4
  of the role is "Never sleep" -- `IdleAction=ignore`, because a bridge that
  suspends is a bridge that is down -- so until the role has been applied, phosh
  idles the phone off the network after a few minutes. The first provision
  therefore has to land in a window while somebody is at the phone; every run
  after it can be driven from anywhere, because by then the phone stays up.

  mDNS was that something, and it was too fragile to be the only one. The
  failure that settled it (2026-08-21): the phone's avahi was running and
  publishing `tailnet-bridge-generic.local` correctly -- a unicast mDNS query
  aimed straight at its address returned the right answer -- but the access point
  does not forward multicast between its 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz radios, and the phone
  was on the band the workstation was not. Unicast worked the whole time;
  multicast never arrived. No amount of code here fixes an access point.

  So there are four ways in, tried in decreasing order of "somebody said so":

      --at <host>        an address on the command line. Explicit beats
                         inferred, so this is tried first and, if it does not
                         answer, refused rather than worked around.
      the conf's name    right for every run after the first.
      <hostname>.local   mDNS, by the ordinary multicast route.
      discovery          ask this subnet's hosts, one at a time, who they are.

  The last one exists because the first three cannot cover a first provision on
  this network, and finding the phone by hand every time is the manual step this
  whole verb exists to remove.

  What it is built on is the half of the mDNS measurement that *worked*.
  Multicast never arrives, but a **unicast** mDNS query -- aimed straight at an
  address, port 5353, asking for the phone's own name -- is answered by the
  phone and by nothing else. It needs no credentials and took 34 ms against a
  live responder here. So discovery is: collect candidate addresses from the
  neighbour table, ask each of them whether it is `<hostname>.local`, and believe
  the one that says yes. Identification remains the host stating its own name --
  never a MAC, a lease or a vendor string, all of which go stale and whose wrong
  answer means provisioning something else.

  Two things about it were learned the hard way and are worth not re-learning.

  It asks in parallel with a one-second deadline, so a round costs a second
  rather than a second per host: the first version asked over ssh instead --
  two accounts, two handshakes, two timeouts each -- and took 100 seconds.

  And the sweep that populates the neighbour table is bounded to 32 at a time.
  254 pings at once with a one-second timeout gave a false negative on a phone
  that had been up for an hour, because that many simultaneous ARP resolutions
  thrash the table; and it is 254 packets across the very link the phone depends
  on, aimed at a radio bridge/devices.sh describes as dropping associations
  under load. The neighbour table is asked *first* and the sweep only happens if
  that fails, so the common case costs neither.

  One general caution, from the afternoon that produced all of this: an
  intermittent network reads exactly like a misconfigured one, and only a
  measurement separates them. Four hypotheses about this access point -- client
  isolation, band isolation, a second AP, a remote firewall -- were all inferred
  and all wrong; the workstation's unreachability was clients reassociating
  while the AP's channel was being changed underneath the diagnosis. Measure
  before building.

GETTING IT ONTO INTERNAL STORAGE

  A card is not where a bridge should live: a bridge writes leases, logs and
  tailscale state for months, and a microSD is the part of a phone most likely to
  wear out or work loose. So the verified image goes onto internal storage and
  the card is the rescue copy -- put it back in and the phone boots Jumpdrive
  again, with the install underneath untouched.

  This is what `wk bridge provision` does by default, and it is worth reading the
  long form once, because every step of it is a command this repo already had:

      wk sysimage build recovery-pinephone      # Jumpdrive, pinned and stored
      wk sysimage write <that id> --disk rpi5:/dev/mmcblk0
      # card into the phone, phone cabled to rpi5, power on
      wk sysimage disks rpi5                    # the phone's eMMC is now a disk
      wk sysimage write <bridge image> --disk rpi5:/dev/sdX

  `wk bridge provision <name>` is that list with the waiting done for you, the
  eMMC identified by difference rather than by eye, and the role applied at the
  end. The pieces stay usable on their own: a run that dies halfway leaves a
  card with Jumpdrive on it and a phone that still boots it, which is exactly
  where a re-run picks up.

  Jumpdrive is the PinePhone's service image: it boots from a card and exports
  the phone's internal storage as USB mass storage. That turns "flash the
  phone's eMMC" into "write a removable disk attached to a machine", which is
  `wk sysimage write` with every refusal and the block-map path it already has,
  and no new verb.

  There was a second route -- write the image from the card system to the idle
  eMMC over ssh -- and it is deliberately gone. It reimplemented dd, partition
  growth and identity-copying against a phone, to reach a disk that Jumpdrive
  hands to the ordinary write path for nothing.

  Then: power off (not reboot -- the card wins a boot), take the card out, power
  on, and `wk bridge setup <name>` to re-apply the role to the installed system.
  It is idempotent and every package it needs is already in the image. provision
  prompts for exactly this and then does the last part itself.

  microSD, and both phones boot one in preference to their internal storage.
  Neither depends on what is already installed: the image carries each device's
  own firmware at the offset its deviceinfo names -- `deviceinfo_sd_embed_firmware`,
  in units of 1024 bytes, so the PinePhone's SPL at 8 KiB and the Librem 5's
  u-boot at 33 KiB, which are the canonical sunxi and i.MX addresses. So the card
  carries its own way of starting. That is what
  makes this the recoverable path: the eMMC install underneath is untouched, and
  removing the card puts the phone back exactly as it was.

  The build host needs a few packages of its own (kpartx, bmap-tools,
  python3-venv, python3-yaml). They are not in host/linux/apt.txt because
  multipath-tools brings a multipathd daemon no other Linux host here wants, so
  the builder asks once, on the machine that needs them.

  What it costs on the build host: about 8 GB under ~/wk-pmos for pmbootstrap's
  chroots and package cache -- which is what makes a rebuild four minutes rather
  than twenty -- plus half a gigabyte per kept build under ~/wk-pmos/out.
  `wk disk` reports both, on every build host a profile names; `wk gc` prunes
  interrupted and superseded builds, and `wk gc --purge-pmos` erases the chroots
  when you want the 8 GB back.

  Long builds detach: `--detach` returns as soon as the build is running on the
  build host, and `--resume` picks it back up and imports it. The build survives
  the connection either way -- it is started with setsid on the far side, which
  is the only reason a dropped WiFi link costs a poll rather than half an hour.

WHAT IS PINNED, AND THE ONE THING PATCHED

  pmbootstrap        3.9.0, a git tag. Every PyPI release of it is yanked, so
                     pip installs it from the project's own repository.
  the pmOS channel   v25.12 -- what pmaports' channels.cfg calls the latest
                     release (Alpine 3.23). Not edge: a device whose job is to
                     still be answering in six months does not want a rolling
                     release. A channel has to be one channels.cfg lists; a
                     branch that merely exists (v26.06 does) is not a channel.
  the device names   pine64-pinephone, purism-librem5

  Both live in image/profiles.sh. The pmaports commit that was actually used is
  recorded in the image's manifest, so `wk sysimage show <id>` says what a card
  was built from.

  And one thing is *patched* rather than pinned: `PMO_KCONFIG`, the kernel
  options a profile needs and pmOS does not set. Today that is exactly one
  option on one profile -- CONFIG_SUNXI_WATCHDOG=m for the PinePhone, whose
  reasoning is under THINGS THAT WILL BITE YOU below. It is applied to the
  aport at build time rather than kept as a patch file, because a patch against
  a generated defconfig conflicts on every pmaports bump; and the pkgrel is
  bumped by 100 so that a patched kernel is always distinguishable from a stock
  one by version alone.

DECLARING AND PROVISIONING ONE

  A bridge is a conf file. Shared, in this repository:

      bridge/hosts/<name>.conf

  ...or this device's own view of one, which wins where both exist:

      ~/.config/wk/bridges/<name>.conf

  Most of the fields are documented at the top of bridge/provision.sh, which is
  the script they are handed to. Three worth thinking about:

    BR_EGRESS    none or nat. Whether the segment may reach the internet. A
                 test board needs it (`wk pi setup` downloads tailscale onto
                 the board itself); a BMC must not have it.
    BR_REACHED_BY  who may reach the segment, in tailnet-policy terms. Printed
                 by setup for you to paste. tag:wk belongs on the board
                 segment and must never appear on the BMC's: root on a bridge
                 is equivalent to whatever is behind it, and a compromised
                 container should not be one hop from a machine's firmware.
    BR_CARD      <machine>:<device> -- the reader this bridge's cards get
                 written on, e.g. rpi5:/dev/mmcblk0. The one field the phone
                 never sees: it is read by `wk bridge provision` on the
                 workstation and is a property of the reader, not of the phone,
                 so `--disk` overrides it for a day the card is somewhere else.
                 Declared rather than discovered because picking the wrong
                 /dev/sd* is the one mistake in this path that destroys
                 something that was not yours to destroy.

  There is no BR_PROFILE, deliberately: image/profiles.sh already records which
  bridge each pmos profile builds (PMO_BRIDGE), and the same fact in two files
  is a fact that drifts. provision derives the profile from that.

  Then:

      wk bridge provision <name>      # the whole path, prompting at the two
                                      # steps that need a hand
      wk bridge setup <name>          # idempotent; re-run after any change
                                      # (WK_BRIDGE_AUTHKEY=tskey-... to skip the
                                      #  prompt on a first run)
      wk bridge status <name>         # the on-device health check, read-only
      wk bridge rm <name>             # removes the role, leaves the OS

  The one thing setup cannot do is apply the tailnet policy: it prints the
  tagOwners, autoApprovers and grant to paste into the admin console. Applying
  it would need an API key with policy-write scope, and this repository holding
  one would mean its compromise rewrites every ACL you have.

  Without `autoApprovers` for the segment the bridge comes up looking perfectly
  healthy and nothing behind it is reachable. `wk bridge status` calls that out
  specifically, because it is the failure that looks like success -- and
  `wk bridge provision` will not report a bridge finished until the phone's own
  `tailscale status` shows the route as primary.

  And pasting the policy is not, on its own, enough -- which is the trap that
  turns a five-minute step into an afternoon. `autoApprovers` is evaluated when
  a node *advertises* a route. A route first advertised before the policy
  existed stays unapproved forever afterwards, because re-running setup
  re-asserts the same value and `tailscale set` with an unchanged value is a
  no-op. Seen exactly so on 2026-08-22: policy in place, every check green
  except the one that matters, `PrimaryRoutes` null. Withdrawing and
  re-advertising forces the evaluation, and `wk bridge setup` now does that by
  itself whenever it finds the route advertised but not primary -- conditional,
  because on a working bridge it would drop the segment for a second for
  nothing. So the recipe is: paste the policy, run `wk bridge setup` again.

  It is also a once-per-bridge step, not a once-per-flash one. Once tag:bridge
  and the segment are in the policy, reflashing the phone needs no console visit
  at all: provision checks, finds the route already approved, and says so.

THINGS THAT WILL BITE YOU

  WiFi power save makes the phone look absent. The RTL8723CS powers its RF side
  down when idle and misses frames aimed at it, so the phone reaches its router
  and answers nothing -- no ssh, no ping, not even ARP, from any host on the
  LAN. It is indistinguishable from a phone that is off, on another subnet, or
  behind an isolated access point, and it will send you looking at your router.
  One command on the phone settles it:

      iw dev wlan0 set power_save off

  The role turns it off (step 5) and so does the image now, because a phone that
  needs it in order to answer ssh cannot be sent it over ssh. If mDNS also looks
  broken, suspect this first: a sleeping radio misses multicast, which reads as
  an access point that will not forward it.

  The phone has no RTC. It boots at 1970, and a 1970 clock fails every TLS
  certificate check -- so `tailscale up` cannot reach its coordination server and
  the symptom is "no internet" while ping and DNS both work. chrony must
  `makestep`, not slew; the role sets `makestep 1.0 -1`.

  And the sting in that tail: OpenRC caches its dependency tree and rebuilds it
  only when an init script is *newer* than the cache. Files written while the
  clock says 1970, then chrony steps to now, and the cache looks decades newer --
  so the bridge services are enabled, symlinked, listed by `rc-update show`,
  absent from `rc-status`, and never started at boot. The role runs
  `rc-update -u` for exactly this. If services will not start at boot but start
  by hand, that is the first thing to check.

  BusyBox `ip` has no `-br`. Alpine, and so pmOS, ships BusyBox: `ip -br addr`
  exits 1 with a usage message. Use `-o`. This was in the netwatch health test,
  where it made a working uplink look dead on every check and set the escalation
  ladder climbing towards reboots.

  A PinePhone has TWO card slots under the back cover, and the microSD is the
  UPPER one. The lower one is the micro-SIM. A card in the SIM slot gives you
  the exact symptom of a card that is not there at all: the phone boots its
  internal storage and never mentions the card. PINE64 lists "the microSD card
  is in the wrong slot" first among the reasons a PinePhone will not boot one,
  which is a good indication of how often it is that. It cost an afternoon here
  once (2026-08-21), after the image, the write and the SPL offset had all been
  verified byte for byte and were all fine.

  Nothing else about SD boot needs configuring, and it is worth knowing that so
  you do not go looking. The A64 boot ROM loads 32 KB from sector 16 of the SD
  card before it looks at the eMMC at all -- no jumper, no DIP switch, no key
  combination -- and postmarketOS's Tow-Boot, which lives in the eMMC's
  dedicated firmware storage, does not override that. A correctly written card
  always wins the boot. So when one does not, the fault is that the ROM never
  read the card: the wrong slot, a card not engaged, or a phone that was woken
  rather than cold-booted. Inserting a card into a running phone does nothing --
  only a cold boot re-runs the ROM.

  The u-boot residue trap that PINE64 documents does *not* apply to a card this
  repo wrote, and knowing why saves re-reading it: the problem there is a card
  *formatted after* being flashed, which leaves a bootloader at 8 KiB (or at
  128 KiB, for the GPT-based Danctnix images) with no OS behind it. Every write
  here lays down a whole image over the front of the card, both offsets
  included, so there is never a stale bootloader in the region the ROM reads.

  Power the phone from a wall charger, never from the machine it exists to
  rescue. Fed from that machine, the out-of-band path dies exactly when it is
  needed. On mains, the battery is a UPS instead of the entire supply.

  Never `poweroff` a bridge. There is no reliable way to power a phone back on
  remotely. `reboot` is fine -- the hardware watchdog recovers hangs, but not a
  clean shutdown.

  Kill switches: WiFi on. The camera switch is the camera stream's access
  control, and it is hardware: switched off there is no capture device, so
  nothing can stream, and no software fault can undo that.

  The downstream interface is renamed by a udev rule, which applies when the
  adapter appears -- an interface that is already up cannot be renamed
  underneath itself. On a first run with the dock already plugged in, re-plug
  it (or reboot) and run setup again; setup says so when it notices.

  And the rule is written *from the adapter's own MAC*, which means a run with
  no adapter enumerated writes neither it nor the address. So an adapter
  plugged in after that run comes up unnamed and unaddressed, and the fix is to
  run `wk bridge setup` again rather than to wait. This used to claim the
  interface would be "matched by MAC when it appears"; nothing had been written
  that could match it.

  That second run does not need a hand at the phone any more either. udev's
  NAME= only applies when a device appears, so an adapter that is already up
  cannot be renamed by it -- which is why this used to end with "re-plug the
  dock, or reboot the phone". A *downed* link can be renamed, so setup now
  brings it down, renames it, and hands it back to NetworkManager, and the udev
  rule is what makes it survive the next boot. Verified across a reboot on
  2026-08-22: lan0 comes back named and addressed with nothing touched.

  If the interface never appears at all, there are three faults and they look
  identical from the outside. `wk bridge status` now tells them apart, because
  the guess it used to print sent an afternoon at the wrong one.

    the port is not in host mode      the dock is refusing a USB Data Role
                                      Swap. Both phones have one port and
                                      default to *device* mode. Powering the
                                      dock before connecting it to the phone
                                      changes the negotiation and is the thing
                                      worth trying; no amount of configuration
                                      fixes a dock that will not swap.

    host mode, nothing enumerated     the dock's own power, or the cable.

    host mode, a hub enumerated,      the ethernet is not on the USB 2 path,
    no NIC                            and on a PinePhone it never will be. See
                                      below.

  A PinePhone's port is USB 2.0 and there is no second data path: the A64 has
  one OTG controller and one USB 2.0 host controller, and the USB-C carries DP
  alt mode rather than SuperSpeed. So a USB-C dock whose ethernet hangs off its
  own USB3 hub hands the phone its USB2 hub and nothing else -- the hub
  enumerates happily, its downstream ports read `not attached` forever, and
  every host-mode assertion succeeds and changes nothing.

  Both halves of that were measured here on 2026-08-22, which is what makes it
  a rule rather than a theory. A generic VIA VL813 dock: role swap fine, phone
  charging, hub up, four ports empty, no NIC, unusable. **The PinePhone's own
  dock: works** -- its ethernet is a CoreChips 0fe6:9900 "10/100M LAN" on the
  USB2 path, claimed by `cdc_ether` with nothing extra installed, up at
  100 Mb/s. (It also presents a Chrontel CH7210 "Billboard" for the DP side
  which binds no driver; that is not a fault.)

  So the question to ask of a dock on this phone is which hub its NIC sits
  behind, and a dock's own RJ45 is not a given. A plain USB 2.0 adapter
  (AX88772, RTL8152) in a USB-A port is the other answer. The Librem 5's
  i.MX8M does have USB3, so none of this constrains that phone.

  And one that looks like nothing at all, because everything is green: the NIC
  can enumerate on the *companion* full-speed controller and run at 12 Mbit/s
  instead of 480. Host mode is correct in that state and the link still says
  100 Mb/s, so only the USB bus speed gives it away -- `wk bridge status`
  prints it and fails on anything below high speed.

  How it happens on a PinePhone (2026-08-22): the dock asks for the data-role
  swap itself and the phone is host by 3.5 s, but at 13 s the pmOS initramfs
  sets up its USB-gadget network and flips the phy back to peripheral with a hub
  attached. EHCI then fails for a minute and gives up at 77 s, the port falls to
  OHCI, and the dock comes up at full speed. It is a race, so it is
  intermittent. wk-bridge-usb-host recovers it with a four-step rebind -- unbind
  OHCI so the companion lets go, unbind EHCI so it forgets it gave up, bind
  EHCI, bind OHCI -- capped at three attempts per boot, because a repair that
  repeats forever is a fault rather than a recovery. The root cause, the
  initramfs taking the port, is not fixed.

  Two more things the health check separates out, both of which look like "no
  adapter" and are not:

    the adapter is there under     it is working; it is simply not called
    its kernel name (eth0)        lan0, because the udev rename is written
                                  from the adapter's own MAC and a setup run
                                  with no adapter plugged in wrote no rule for
                                  it. `wk bridge setup` again is the fix, and
                                  it renames the link in place -- no re-plug,
                                  no reboot, nothing at the phone.

    something on the bus with     a missing kernel module, not a missing dock.
    no driver bound               dmesg names the vendor/product and which
                                  driver should have claimed it.

  The hardware watchdog on a PinePhone needs a kernel option pmOS does not
  set, and this repo now sets it. Worth reading once, because it is the only
  place wk edits somebody else's tree.

  The A64 carries a watchdog and the device tree declares it
  (`allwinner,sun50i-a64-wdt` at 0x1c20ca0) -- but stock
  `linux-postmarketos-allwinner` is built with CONFIG_SUNXI_WATCHDOG unset, so
  nothing binds to the node and there is no /dev/watchdog to feed. That is not
  cosmetic on a bridge: the watchdog is the only thing that recovers a kernel
  which has stopped scheduling, everything else here assumes the machine is
  still running, and this is the device you cannot walk up to.

  So `bridge-pinephone` declares the option (`PMO_KCONFIG` in
  image/profiles.sh) and `wk sysimage build` patches it into the kernel aport
  before building: the option is set, the APKBUILD's checksums are regenerated
  -- abuild refuses the build otherwise, and says only "Use 'abuild checksum'"
  -- and pkgrel is bumped by 100, without which pmbootstrap happily reuses the
  stock package it already has and the change is applied, checksummed and
  never compiled. `=m` rather than `=y`, so the driver is loaded by the role
  and a driver that misbehaves is a line in a file rather than a reflash.

  `wk bridge setup` then loads it by the *device's own modalias*, read out of
  sysfs -- so no module name appears anywhere in the role, and the same code
  does the right thing on a device whose kernel already has the driver and
  nothing at all on one that has no such node.

  Two consequences worth knowing. A phone flashed before this landed has a
  kernel without the driver and needs a reflash to get it -- `wk bridge status`
  says which of the two states it is in. And the Librem 5 gets no such entry:
  its watchdog situation is unmeasured, and guessing at a second SoC's kconfig
  from this one's is how a working image stops booting.

  An ssh session dying while the phone stays up is usually a WiFi roam, not a
  fault -- two APs on one SSID and the phone moves between them. Keepalives,
  not investigation. dotfiles/ssh/config sets ServerAliveInterval for the
  bridges for this reason.

  Nothing on the phone is upgraded unattended, deliberately. A kernel bump that
  fails to boot needs the device in your hands: the PinePhone does have a UART,
  on the headphone jack behind one of the DIP switches, but it needs a special
  cable and the back off, and the Librem 5's is not something you have wired. So
  `apk upgrade` when you are in front of it -- and the card is the fallback,
  since rewriting it is one `wk sysimage write` away.
